Analysts generally work on projects that closely follow some version of the Data Analysis Lifecycle described above. In the first step of the process, Asking the Question, the goal of each project is defined. Goals for projects are based on external (client) or internal (stakeholder) business requirements—this is why business understanding is key to successful data analysis. Businesses often have very different goals, but every type of business benefits from understanding their data to gain insights into their processes, procedures and customer behaviors. Let’s examine a couple of example projects and the questions that might be answered by an analysis.

Where should the marketing budget be concentrated to increase new business? A bicycle manufacturer wants to identify areas where sales could be improved by targeted marketing efforts. Using sales records, customer demographic information and products, they can decide where advertising is most likely to increase new business.

How can a company make sure they are stocking the right inventory? A medical supply company for hospitals knows that certain common conditions require high volumes of certain supplies, and that patient demographics are associated with certain diagnoses of these conditions. They want to use hospital data to gain insights into patient demographics and common diagnoses to identify patterns. Analysts can help the company find these patterns and ensure that they have the right supplies on hand at the right times to meet the needs of their customers.

What products or services should be recommended to a customer? Recommendation systems are a popular way to introduce current consumers to new products and services. Think of the many recommendation systems that you encounter during your online experiences. A very common example of this is video subscription services, which often analyze customer purchasing habits, ratings and reviews to help determine which products and services to recommend to those customers.

But data analysis is not limited to just business problems. Think about your personal interests and questions that you might want to answer in order to gain a better understanding of the field. As you work through the labs and activities in the course, you will be building valuable skills for each step of the Data Analysis Lifecycle. Potential employers expect to see evidence that demonstrates the ability to complete a project from start to finish. For data analyst positions, this is usually done through a project portfolio. Starting now and continuing through this course, you can be planning to create your own personal project portfolio to share with prospective employers.